ZIP 316: Unified Addresses (#485)
zcash/zips: zip-0316.rst

  future consensus state side-effects.
Receiver
  The necessary information to transfer an asset to a Recipient that generated
  that Receiver using a specific Transfer Protocol. Each Receiver is associated
  unambiguously with a specific Receiver Type.
Legacy Address (or LA)
  A transparent, Sprout, or Sapling Address.
Unified Address (or UA)
  A Unified Address combines multiple Receivers.
Address
  Either a Legacy Address or a Unified Address.
Transfer Protocol
  A specification of how a Sender can transfer assets to a Recipient.
  For example, the Transfer Protocol for a Sapling Receiver is the subset
  of the Zcash protocol required to successfully transfer ZEC using Sapling
  Spend/Output Transfers as specified in the Zcash Protocol Specification.
  (A single Zcash transaction can contain transfers of multiple
  Transfer Protocols. For example a t→z transaction that shields to the
  Sapling pool requires both Transparent and Sapling Transfer Protocols.)
Address Encoding
  The externally visible encoding of an Address (e.g. as a string of
  characters or a QR code).

Abstract
========

This proposal defines Unified Addresses, which bundle together Zcash addresses

> (or other payment methods) of different types in a way that can be presented as

Author: ```suggestion
of different types in a way that can be presented as
```

a single Address Encoding. It also defines Unified Viewing Keys, which perform
a similar function for Zcash viewing keys.

Motivation
==========

Up to and including the Canopy network upgrade, Zcash supported the following
payment address types:

* Transparent Addresses (P2PKH and P2SH)
* Sprout Addresses
* Sapling Addresses

Each of these has its own Address Encodings, as a string and as a QR code.
(Since the QR code is derivable from the string encoding, for many purposes
it suffices to consider the string encoding.)

The Orchard proposal [#zip-0224]_ adds a new address type, Orchard Addresses.

The difficulty with defining new Address Encodings for each address type, is
that end-users are forced to be aware of the various types, and in particular
which types are supported by a given Sender or Recipient. In order to make
sure that transfers are completed successfully, users may be forced to
explicitly generate addresses of different types and re-distribute encodings
of them, which adds significant friction and cognitive overhead to
understanding and using Zcash.

The goals for a Unified Address standard are as follows:

> - Simplify coordination between receivers and senders of Zcash wallets by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simplify coordination between receivers and senders of Zcash by
```

  removing complexity from negotiating address types.
- Provide a “bridging mechanism” to allow shielded wallets to successfully
  interact with conformant Transparent-Only wallets.
- Allow older conformant wallets to interact seamlessly with newer wallets.
- Enable users of newer wallets to upgrade to newer transaction technologies
  and/or pools while maintaining seamless interactions with counterparties
  using older wallets.

> - Allow wallets to shoulder more sophisticated responsibilities for shielding
>   and/or migrating user funds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Facilitate wallets to assume more sophisticated responsibilities for shielding
  and/or migrating user funds.
```

  underlying protocol changes.
- Provide forward compatibility that is standard for all wallets across a
  range of potential future features. Some examples might include Layer 2
  features, cross-chain interoperability and bridging, and decentralized
  exchange.
- The standard should work well for Zcash today and upcoming potential
  upgrades, and also anticipate even broader use cases down the road such
  as cross-chain functionality.

Requirements
============

Overview
--------

Unified Addresses specify multiple methods for payment to a Recipient's Wallet.
The Sender's Wallet can then non-interactively select the method of payment.

Importantly, any wallet can support Unified Addresses, even when that wallet
only supports a subset of payment methods for receiving and/or sending.

Despite having some similar characteristics, the Unified Address standard is
orthogonal to Payment Request URIs [#zip-0321]_ and similar schemes, and the
Unified Address format is likely to be incorporated into such schemes as a new
address type.

Concepts
--------

Wallets follow a model *Interaction Flow* as follows:

1. A Recipient *generates* an Address.

> 2. The Recipient wallet or human user encodes the address, and
>    *distributes* this Address Encoding through mechanisms which may be
>    “out-of-band” (example: they spray paint a QR Code on a sign) or
>    they may be more or less “in-band” (example: they include a string
>    encoding of a ``Reply-To`` address in an encrypted memo following a
>    common standard).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The Recipient wallet *encodes* the address.
3. The Recipient wallet or human user *distributes* this Address Encoding. This ZIP leaves distribution mechanisms out of scope.
```

> 3. A Sender wallet or user *imports* the Address Encoding through any of
>    a variety of mechanisms (QR Code scanning, Payment URIs, cut-and-paste,
>    or “in-band” protocols like ``Reply-To`` memos). This includes decoding
>    and validity checks.
> 4. (Perhaps later in time) the Sender wallet executes a transfer of ZEC
>    (or other assets or future protocol state changes) to the Address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. A Sender wallet or user *imports* the Address Encoding through any of
   a variety of mechanisms (QR Code scanning, Payment URIs, cut-and-paste,
   or “in-band” protocols like ``Reply-To`` memos). This includes decoding
   and validity checks.
5. (Perhaps later in time) the Sender wallet executes a transfer of ZEC
   (or other assets or future protocol state changes) to the Address.
```

> These steps are a funnel: encodings of the same Address may be distributed
> zero or more times through different means. Zero or more Senders may import
> addresses. Zero or more of those may execute a Transfer. A single Sender may
> execute multiple Transfers over time from a single import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encodings of the same Address may be distributed
zero or more times through different means. Zero or more Senders may import
addresses. Zero or more of those may execute a Transfer. A single Sender may
execute multiple Transfers over time from a single import.
```

[TODO: examples]

Addresses
---------

A Unified Address (or UA for short) combines one or more Receivers.

When new Transport Protocols are introduced to the Zcash protocol after
Unified Addresses are standardized, those should introduce new Receiver Types
but *not* different address types outside of the UA standard. There needs
to be a compelling reason to deviate from the standard, since the benefits
of UA come precisely from their applicability across all new protocol
upgrades.

Receivers
---------

> Every Wallet must anticipate and properly parse a UA with any unknown
> arbitrary Receiver Type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every Wallet must anticipate and properly *parse* a UA containing unknown Receiver Types.
```

> When Transferring to a valid UA, a Sender must behave as if any unknown

Reviewer 2: The concept "valid UA" is used throughout the document. Shall we add a "validation" section to it? 
It could be redundant given that this topic is distributed across different sections but, I assume that it will be much appreciated by readers looking for validation criteria in this document for development or troubleshooting purposes.

Author: There is now an explicit decoding algorithm. Kris and I think it's obvious that a valid UA is a UA that is not rejected by that algorithm.

> When Transferring to a valid UA, a Sender must behave as if any unknown
> Receiver Type is simply not present for the purposes of the transfer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When Transferring to a valid UA, a Sender must behave as if the value associated with any unknown
Receiver Type is simply not present for the purposes of the transfer.
```

> A Wallet may process unknown Receiver Types by indicating to the user

Reviewer 2: What should a parser or a parsing wallet do in the presence of a sound UA that contains an invalid receiver component?
Should it treat the invalid receiver the same way as unknown ones? should that render the rest of the receivers components invalid as well?

Author: The decoding algorithm now says that the whole UA MUST be rejected in this case.

their presence or similar information for usability or diagnostic purposes.

Transport Encoding
------------------

The string encoding is “opaque” to human readers: it does *not* allow
visual identification of which Receivers or Receiver Types are present.

- Rationale: The general thinking behind UAs is to allow wallets to
  streamline user experience (UX). If human users can parse a UA and
  alter their behaviour based on that, then different users will end up
  using the same wallet very differently; this complicates troubleshooting
  and learning from other users or educational resources. Note that this
  does not preclude a wallet from providing user-friendly displays or
  indications about Receiver support, and the wallet's UX design can

>   decide when and how to do this and build a behavioural flow around that.

Reviewer: Not sure if this rationale is persuasive, we ZIP editors were not persuaded. 😀

Author: We decided to just remove this rationale paragraph for now. cc: @nathan-at-least

UX hazards.

There is a well-defined encoding of a Unified Address as a QR Code,
which produces QR codes that are reasonably compact and robust.

There is a well-defined transformation between the QR Code and string
encodings in either direction.

The string encoding fits into ZIP-321 Payment URIs [#zip-0321]_ and
general URIs without introducing parse ambiguities.

The encoding must support sufficiently many Recipient Types to allow
for reasonable future expansion.

The encoding must allow all wallets to safely and correctly parse out
unknown Receiver Types well enough to ignore them.

Transfers
---------

When executing a Transfer the Sender selects a transfer method via a
Selection process.

Given a valid UA, Selection must treat any unrecognized Receiver as
though it were absent.

- This property is crucial for forward compatibility to ensure users
  who upgrade to newer protocols / UAs don't lose the ability to smoothly
  interact with older wallets.

- This property is crucial for allowing Transparent-Only UA-Conformant
  wallets to interact with newer shielded wallets, removing a
  disincentive for adopting newer shielded wallets.

> - This property also allows Transparent-Only wallets to upgrade to
>   shielded support without re-acquiring counterparty UAs, or even when
>   they are re-acquired the user flow and usability will be minimally
>   disrupted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This property also allows Transparent-Only wallets to upgrade to
  shielded support without re-acquiring counterparty UAs. If
  they are re-acquired, the user flow and usability will be minimally
  disrupted.
```

Open Issues and Known Concerns
------------------------------

FIXME: We have a few of these I [Nathan] will add in future edits.
This is especially true of privacy impacts of transparent or cross-pool
transactions and the associated UX issues.

Non-requirements
================

...

Specification
=============

Definitions
-----------

Encoding of Unified Payment Addresses

> -------------------------------------

Reviewer 3: This entire section needs to use `Receiver` terminology rather than `address`.

Rather than defining a Bech32 string encoding of Orchard shielded
payment addresses, we instead define a unified payment address format
that is able to encode a set of payment addresses of different types.
This enables the consumer of an address to choose the best address
type it supports, providing a better user experience as new formats
are added in the future.

Assume that we are given a set of one or more raw encodings of
payment addresses of distinct types. That is, the set may optionally
contain one of each of the payment address types in the following
list:

* typecode :math:`\mathtt{0x03}` — an Orchard raw address as defined
  in [#protocol-orchardpaymentaddrencoding]_;

* typecode :math:`\mathtt{0x02}` — a Sapling raw address as defined
  in [#protocol-saplingpaymentaddrencoding]_;

* typecode :math:`\mathtt{0x01}` — a transparent P2SH address, *or*
  typecode :math:`\mathtt{0x00}` — a transparent P2PKH address.

A unified payment address MUST contain at least one shielded payment
address (typecodes :math:`\geq \mathtt{0x02}`).

> The intended semantics is that the consumer of a unified payment
> address SHOULD take the “best” address type that it supports from
> the set, i.e. the first in the above list. For example, if the
> unified payment address includes an Orchard address, and the consumer
> supports sending funds to Orchard addresses, and no more recent
> address format has been defined at the time of use, then the Orchard
> address SHOULD be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intended semantics is that the consumer of a unified payment
address SHOULD take the “best” address type that it supports from
the set, defined to be the first in the above list. For example, if the
unified payment address includes an Orchard address, and the consumer
supports sending funds to Orchard addresses, and no more recent
address format has been defined at the time of use, then the Orchard
address SHOULD be used.
```

> The raw encoding of a unified payment address is a concatenation of
> :math:`(\mathtt{typecode}, \mathtt{length}, \mathtt{addr})` encodings
> of the consituent addresses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The raw encoding of a unified payment address is a concatenation of
:math:`(\mathtt{typecode}, \mathtt{length}, \mathtt{addr})` encodings
of the consituent Receivers:
```

defined in [#bip-0350]_) is “``u``”. For unified payment addresses
on Testnet, the Human-Readable Part is “``utest``”.

Notes:

* The :math:`\mathtt{length}` field is always encoded as a single
  byte, *not* as a :math:`\mathtt{compactSize}`.

* For transparent addresses, the :math:`\mathtt{addr}` field does not
  include the first two bytes of a raw encoding.

* There is intentionally no typecode defined for a Sprout shielded
  payment address. Since it is no longer possible (since activation
  of ZIP 211 in the Canopy network upgrade [#zip-0211]_) to send
  funds into the Sprout chain value pool, this would not be generally
  useful.

* Consumers MUST ignore constituent addresses with typecodes they do
  not recognize.

* Consumers MUST reject unified payment addresses in which the same
  typecode appears more than once, or that include both P2SH and
  P2PKH transparent addresses, or that contain only a transparent
  address.

* Producers SHOULD order the constituent addresses in the same order
  as the list of address types above. However, consumers MUST NOT
  assume this ordering, and it does not affect which address should
  be used by a consumer.

> * There MUST NOT be additional bytes at the end of the encoding that
>   cannot be interpreted as specified above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There MUST NOT be additional bytes at the end of the raw encoding that
  cannot be interpreted as specified above.
```

* return :math:`c \,||\, d`.
   
The first argument to BLAKE2b below is the personalization.

We instantiate :math:`H_i(u)` by
:math:`\mathsf{BLAKE2b‐}(8\ell_L)(“\mathtt{UA\_F4Jumble\_H\_}” \,||\,`
:math:`[i, 0], u)`.

We instantiate :math:`G_i(u)` as the first :math:`\ell_R` bytes of the
concatenation of
:math:`[\mathsf{BLAKE2b‐}512(“\mathtt{UA\_F4Jumble\_G\_}” \,||\,`
:math:`[i, j], u) \text{ for } j \text{ from } 0 \text{ up to}`
:math:`\mathsf{ceiling}(\ell_R/\ell_H)-1]`.

.. figure:: zip-0316-f4.png
    :align: center
    :figclass: align-center

    Diagram of 4-round unkeyed Feistel construction

(In practice the lengths :math:`\ell_L` and :math:`\ell_R` will be roughly
the same until :math:`\ell_M` is larger than :math:`128` bytes.)

Usage for Unified Addresses
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The producer of a unified address applies :math:`\mathsf{F4Jumble}` to the
encoding of the sequence of (typecode, length, addr) before encoding it
with Bech32m.

The consumer rejects any Bech32m-decoded byte sequence that is less than
22 bytes; otherwise it applies :math:`\mathsf{F4Jumble}^{-1}` before
parsing the result. (22 bytes is the minimum size of a valid encoded

> address sequence, corresponding to just a transparent address.)

Author: 22..=16448 bytes

:math:`((a \oplus t) \,||\, b', (c \oplus t) \,||\, d')` such that
:math:`a \oplus t` is close to :math:`a` and :math:`c \oplus t` is close
to :math:`c`.
(:math:`b'` and :math:`d'` will not be close to :math:`b` and :math:`d`,
but that isn't necessarily required for a valid attack.)

A 4-round Feistel thwarts this and similar attacks. Defining :math:`x` and
:math:`y` as the intermediate values in the first diagram above:

* if :math:`(x', y')` are fixed to the same values as :math:`(x, y)`, then
  :math:`(a', b', c', d') = (a, b, c, d)`;

* if :math:`x' = x` but :math:`y' \neq y`, then the adversary is able to
  introduce a controlled :math:`\oplus`-difference
  :math:`a \oplus a' = y \oplus y'`, but the other three pieces
  :math:`(b, c, d)` are all randomized, which is sufficient;

* if :math:`y' = y` but :math:`x' \neq x`, then the adversary is able to
  introduce a controlled :math:`\oplus`-difference
  :math:`d \oplus d' = x \oplus x'`, but the other three pieces
  :math:`(a, b, c)` are all randomized, which is sufficient;

* if :math:`x' \neq x` and :math:`y' \neq y`, all four pieces are
  randomized.

Note that the size of each piece is at least 11 bytes. TODO: analyze

> whether this is sufficient when using 4 rounds.

Reviewer 4: If there is a chance of needing to add extra bytes to make 4-round Feistel secure, wouldn't a more prudent choice be to go with just OAEP? That always adds bytes, but is 2-rounds and extra bytes are negligible relative increase for longer encodings, and does not require involved security analysis (at least OAEP in ROM is very easy to analyze.) Moreover, OAEP might already have production-quality implementations.

Author: OAEP is effectively a 2-round Feistel. 3 or fewer rounds is insecure for this application, as explained in the "Heuristic analysis" section. In any case, I believe OAEP would actually have the same *potential* issue for small input sizes.
